religions.md, before:

# some religions and relevant info

## basics [^3]

- etymology
  - religio (respect for what is sacred)
  - religare (to bind, in the sense of an obligation)
  - god
    - english word itself is derived from the Proto-Germanic * ǥuđan
    - reconstructed Proto-Indo-European form * ǵhu-tó-m 
      - was likely based on the root * ǵhau(ə)-, which meant either "to call" or "to invoke"
  - allāh
    - arabic term used by muslims and arabic speaking christians and jews meaning "the god"
    - has no plural form
    - ʾilāh is the term used for a deity or a god in general
  - бог
    - общеславянское происхождение 
    - родственно иранскому baga и санскритскому bhagas — «податель благ»
    - богатство, bogatъ, ubogъ
    - доля, делить, получать долю, наделять

- religious experience
  - refers to the conviction or sensation that one is connected to “the divine” 
  - this type of communion might be experienced when people are praying or meditating

- world religions
  - christianity (forms around 0ce)
  - islam (forms 610-670 ce)
  - buddhism (forms between 600-400 bce)

- classification
  - animism
  - polytheism
  - monotheism
  - atheistic
    - practices of dialectical materialism in ussr


## well known

### christianity 31.2%

  - stems from judaism around 0ce
    - judaism was formed around 500bce
      - stems from jahwism 
        - jahwism was formed around 1200bce, mesopotamia
  - old testament
    - based primarily upon the 24 books of the Hebrew Bible or Tanakh 
    - was written around 500 bce


### islam 24.1%

- forms 610-670 ce
  - sacred cities: mecca, medina, jerusalim
  - hijr al-aswad (the black stone) 
    - presimably a meteorite
    - located in kabba (black-gold-white cube building) in mecca (city)
  - caliphate or khilāfah (arabic pronunciation: [xi'laːfah]) 
    - is an institution or public office governing a territory under islamic rule
  - sacred books: quran, hadith

- two approaches/interpretations
  - sunni [суниты]
    - fundamentalists are
      - alcaida, wahabits
      - islamists: government defined by quran with sharia law
      - arabists

    - literate/direct interpretaion of quran
  - shia [шииты]
    - allow allegorical interpretations of quran by high ranking clergy (ayatollahs)
    - alawites [алавиты]
      - sincretism (mixture) of islam, christianity and some other stuff


### hinduism 15.1%

- tbd


### buddhism 6.9%

- forms between 600-400 bce
- originated in ancient India as a Sramana tradition


### sikhism (0.3%)

- tbd


### judaism (0.2%)

- tbd


### taosism 0.04%

- keystones
  - tao te ching, a book containing teachings attributed to lao tzu (late 4th century bce)
  - later writings of zhuangzi
- interesting ideas regarding duality of inner and outter world


### mesoamerican

- includes aztec and maya religions
- nagual (pronounced [na'wal])
  - magician, transforming witch, transforming trickster or shape shifter
- tonal (from nahuatl word tonalli)
  - "day" or "daysign"
  - belief found in many indigenous mesoamerican cultures
    - that a person upon being born acquires a close spiritual link to an animal
    - such link that lasts throughout the lives of both creatures
    - essentially animalism + totemism
- сhichimeca (spanish: [tʃitʃiˈmeka]) 
  - name that the Nahua peoples of Mexico generically applied to nomadic and 
    semi-nomadic peoples who were established in present-day Bajio region of Mexico
  - carried the same sense as the roman term "barbarian" to describe пermanic tribes


### charvaka (lokayata) [^1]

- forms around 600 bce
- ancient school of indian materialism and hedonism
- holds direct perception, empiricism and conditional inference as proper sources of knowledge
- embraces philosophical skepticism
- rejects ritualism and supernaturalism


### rastafari (rastafarianism) [^2]

- developed in Jamaica during the 1930s
  - haile selassie, the emperor of Ethiopia between 1930 and 1974
    - many regard him as the second coming of jesus and jah incarnate
- here is no central authority in control of the movement, lots of diversity
- practitioners call themselves rastafari, rastafarians, or rastas
- based on a specific interpretation of the bible
  - monotheistic belief in a single god, referred to as jah
    - partially reside within each individual
- classified as
  - religious movement
  - social movement


## social formation principles

- used for ppl aggregation/segregation
- many principles will likely mix/intersect in any particular instance

- principles
  - territorial proximity
  - spatial position/orientation
    - elevated hill, stage, etc
    - lying vs standing
    - vulnerable postures
      - submission/trust, may personal/impersonal
  - physical resource
  - artifact
  - charismatic individual
    - scents: pheromones, fragrances, etc
    - voice timbre
    - atypical body postures, moves
    - atypical mimics

  - language
  - divine texts
  - education
    - institution
    - methodology
      - imposed artificial barriers on knowledge aquisition

  - sound making
    - music styles
    
  - trade
    - barter
    - fiat money (does not have intrinsic value and does not have use value)
    - securities, certificates of ownership
    - crypto
    - non-fungible tokens

  - body properties
    - skin colour, epicantus, mass, height, etc.
  - body practices
    - excerise
    - decoration: piercing, tatoo
  - ritual
  - habit

  - shared fantasy
    - almighty/supernatural being


## references

[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charvaka
[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rastafari
[^3]: https://opentextbc.ca/introductiontosociology/chapter/chapter-15-religion

Commit message:

Update dev-networking.md, religions.md

religions.md, after:

# some religions and relevant info

## basics [^3]

- etymology
  - religio (respect for what is sacred)
  - religare (to bind, in the sense of an obligation)
  - god
    - english word itself is derived from the Proto-Germanic * ǥuđan
    - reconstructed Proto-Indo-European form * ǵhu-tó-m 
      - was likely based on the root * ǵhau(ə)-, which meant either "to call" or "to invoke"
  - allāh
    - arabic term used by muslims and arabic speaking christians and jews meaning "the god"
    - has no plural form
    - ʾilāh is the term used for a deity or a god in general
  - бог
    - общеславянское происхождение 
    - родственно иранскому baga и санскритскому bhagas — «податель благ»
    - богатство, bogatъ, ubogъ
    - доля, делить, получать долю, наделять

- religious experience
  - refers to the conviction or sensation that one is connected to “the divine” 
  - this type of communion might be experienced when people are praying or meditating

- world religions
  - christianity (forms around 0ce)
  - islam (forms 610-670 ce)
  - buddhism (forms between 600-400 bce)

- classification
  - animism
  - polytheism
  - monotheism
  - atheistic
    - practices of dialectical materialism in ussr


## well known


### paganism

- used in the fourth century by early christians for people in the roman empire 
  who practiced polytheism or ethnic religions other than judaism

- saturnalia
  - celebration in honour of the god Saturn
  - held on 17 December of the Julian calendar and later expanded with festivities through to 23 December
  - was overriden later by christmas, which is celebrated at about the same time now


### christianity 31.2%

- stems from judaism around 0ce
  - judaism was formed around 500bce
    - stems from jahwism 
      - jahwism was formed around 1200bce, mesopotamia
- old testament
  - based primarily upon the 24 books of the Hebrew Bible or Tanakh 
  - was written around 500 bce


### islam 24.1%

- forms 610-670 ce
  - sacred cities: mecca, medina, jerusalim
  - hijr al-aswad (the black stone) 
    - presimably a meteorite
    - located in kabba (black-gold-white cube building) in mecca (city)
  - caliphate or khilāfah (arabic pronunciation: [xi'laːfah]) 
    - is an institution or public office governing a territory under islamic rule
  - sacred books: quran, hadith

- two approaches/interpretations
  - sunni [суниты]
    - fundamentalists are
      - alcaida, wahabits
      - islamists: government defined by quran with sharia law
      - arabists

    - literate/direct interpretaion of quran
  - shia [шииты]
    - allow allegorical interpretations of quran by high ranking clergy (ayatollahs)
    - alawites [алавиты]
      - sincretism (mixture) of islam, christianity and some other stuff


### hinduism 15.1%

- tbd


### buddhism 6.9%

- forms between 600-400 bce
- originated in ancient India as a Sramana tradition


### sikhism (0.3%)

- tbd


### judaism (0.2%)

- tbd


### taosism 0.04%

- keystones
  - tao te ching, a book containing teachings attributed to lao tzu (late 4th century bce)
  - later writings of zhuangzi
- interesting ideas regarding duality of inner and outter world


### mesoamerican

- includes aztec and maya religions
- nagual (pronounced [na'wal])
  - magician, transforming witch, transforming trickster or shape shifter
- tonal (from nahuatl word tonalli)
  - "day" or "daysign"
  - belief found in many indigenous mesoamerican cultures
    - that a person upon being born acquires a close spiritual link to an animal
    - such link that lasts throughout the lives of both creatures
    - essentially animalism + totemism
- сhichimeca (spanish: [tʃitʃiˈmeka]) 
  - name that the Nahua peoples of Mexico generically applied to nomadic and 
    semi-nomadic peoples who were established in present-day Bajio region of Mexico
  - carried the same sense as the roman term "barbarian" to describe пermanic tribes


### charvaka (lokayata) [^1]

- forms around 600 bce
- ancient school of indian materialism and hedonism
- holds direct perception, empiricism and conditional inference as proper sources of knowledge
- embraces philosophical skepticism
- rejects ritualism and supernaturalism


### rastafari (rastafarianism) [^2]

- developed in Jamaica during the 1930s
  - haile selassie, the emperor of Ethiopia between 1930 and 1974
    - many regard him as the second coming of jesus and jah incarnate
- here is no central authority in control of the movement, lots of diversity
- practitioners call themselves rastafari, rastafarians, or rastas
- based on a specific interpretation of the bible
  - monotheistic belief in a single god, referred to as jah
    - partially reside within each individual
- classified as
  - religious movement
  - social movement


## social formation principles

- used for ppl aggregation/segregation
- many principles will likely mix/intersect in any particular instance

- principles
  - territorial proximity
  - spatial position/orientation
    - elevated hill, stage, etc
    - lying vs standing
    - vulnerable postures
      - submission/trust, may personal/impersonal
  - physical resource
  - artifact
  - charismatic individual
    - scents: pheromones, fragrances, etc
    - voice timbre
    - atypical body postures, moves
    - atypical mimics

  - language
  - divine texts
  - education
    - institution
    - methodology
      - imposed artificial barriers on knowledge aquisition

  - sound making
    - music styles
    
  - trade
    - barter
    - fiat money (does not have intrinsic value and does not have use value)
    - securities, certificates of ownership
    - crypto
    - non-fungible tokens

  - body properties
    - skin colour, epicantus, mass, height, etc.
  - body practices
    - excerise
    - decoration: piercing, tatoo
  - ritual
  - habit

  - shared fantasy
    - almighty/supernatural being


## references

[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charvaka
[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rastafari
[^3]: https://opentextbc.ca/introductiontosociology/chapter/chapter-15-religion
